‘Save’. Verb.
‘to deliver someone from danger or difficulty’.
The urge to save people might sound
— by definition — like an unqualified
social good.
Of course in countless cases, the impulse
to assist individuals
we perceive to be in some kind of trouble
is a resoundingly positive one.
But, being human, that impulse can misfire.
Maisy spots a man drowning.
She dives in and drags him ashore, kicking
and thrashing.
He then tells her he wasn’t drowning but waving.
Awkward.
As onlookers to this incident, we might view it
as a well-intentioned mistake and see the
funny side.
But then it happens with another swimmer.
And another.
Each time the swimmer tells Maisy her intervention
wasn’t needed.
But Maisy remains convinced that without her
they would’ve perished.
She dismisses their protests as face-saving
delusions.
And, swallowing the increasingly salty martyrdom
she feels at their ingratitude
Maisy continues her redundant rescue campaign.
It’s as if she’s on a pre-programmed mission
unable to register conflicting new intel and
revise her course of action.
The compulsion to rescue others is commonly
known as a ‘saviour complex’.
The word ‘complex’ refers to a pervasive
pattern of feelings, beliefs, perceptions, impulses
all based on a specific issue.
With guilt complexes, this pattern centres
around notions of personal blame.
With superiority complexes, the pattern reinforces
ideas about personal status and value.
This pattern becomes the lens through which
we view ourselves.
Its distorted nature clouds our ability to
process feedback from the environment.
When reality conflicts with this lens, we
bend and break reality to fit
inventing fallacious denials and rationalisations
to erase facts and destroy context.
This makes the complex maladaptive
—ie it doesn’t adapt adequately or appropriately
to the situation.
Which is why, despite consistent evidence
to the contrary
individuals like Maisy manage to maintain
their heroic self-images.
As I’ll be exploring later with some real-life examples
there’s no single path to a saviour complex.
Like comic book superheroes
people with saviour complexes
are an eclectic group with a vast variety
of origin stories.
The compulsions that drive saviour behaviour
can take hold in childhood
or in adulthood in response to transformative
life experiences
from overcoming a major illness to witnessing
a grave injustice
to encountering an influential new social group.
Saviour compulsions could be rooted
in mainly individual or ideological factors
—or a combination.
Their targets could range from loved ones
to the whole of humanity.
But a common thread among all these saviours
is a persistent failure
to look closely at the people they plan to save
—and see them for who they are.
One of the habits we slip into when we develop
maladaptive saviour tendencies is infantilising people.
We view them as less capable and aware than
they are.
And, as we would with children
we start to impose our help on them without
invitation or consultation.
For the target, our unsolicited interventions
can feel awkward, confusing and alienating.
In some cases, our ‘help’ might get so
smothering and invasive
that it creates hefty additional obstacles
for targets to overcome.
Often, there wasn’t even a problem to fix
in the first place.
We just invented it to satisfy our insatiable
urge to help.
Overcoming these maladaptive saviour compulsions
is possible
if we’re willing to engage in some serious
self-reflection.
Unfortunately, we sometimes have to reach
crisis point
before we take even a sidelong glimpse at
ourselves.
We have to drive ourselves to exhaustion.
Relationships and careers have to start crumbling
and collapsing.
Even when things are falling apart, it can
be unthinkably tough to face the truth
that for all the years we’ve been donning
our gaudy superhero costumes
believing we were making a real difference
all we were actually doing was participating
in an addictive form
of bogus social interaction known as drama.
We are a complex, multi-faceted species
with a staggering potential for spontaneity,
adaptability and creativity.
Which is handy in view of our unfathomable
individual variation.
Each of us is born with our own unique combination
of physical and psychological capacities and
thrust with no road map
into our own distinctive social, cultural
and environmental conditions.
In confronting the obstacles of our particular
roll-of-the-dice existence
—from minor irritations to major disasters —
we each have at our disposal a brain bursting
with critical analytical potential.
But often, instead of using these formidable faculties
to figure out real practical solutions to
our problems
we get sidetracked into an empty parody of
problem-solving called drama.
Drama allows us to pretend we’re tackling
real issues
when we’re actually just indulging in self-affirming
mind games.
Drama brings out the worst in us
opening the doors to our most controlling,
coercive, dehumanising behaviour.
When we develop powerful saviour tendencies
we seem drawn to the artificial glow of drama
like moths to a porch light.
Steadfast in the belief we’re fighting the
good fight
we can drift into the most disturbing extremes
without a moral twinge.
I use the word drama in the social-psychological
sense
although there are parallels with the theatrical sense.
In theatrical drama, scenes that appear spontaneous
are in fact predefined.
What seem like authentic interactions are
built on illusion and misdirection.
In social-psychological drama
individuals also deliver performances based
on deceptive predefined roles.
The actors on this dramatic stage typically
fall into one of three interconnected positions.
Together these form what psychologist Steven
Karpman dubbed the ‘drama triangle’.
First there’s the victim.
In this dramatic role, we play the part of
a powerless injured party.
We become passive and self-pitying and, like
children
we look to other people to rescue us.
Confusingly, if we’re offered real practical
solutions
we’ll often find ways to avoid, reject or
sabotage them.
Real solutions generally involve taking adult
responsibility for our own welfare
— and drama-based victimhood is rooted in
the rejection of responsibility.
We’re invested in the idea that our feelings,
our experiences,
our lives are determined by other people.
Next we have the persecutor, who looks for
victims to harass, attack and oppress.
In this dramatic role, we become self-righteous
and dictatorial.
We might portray ourselves as purveyors of
truth and justice.
But we disregard the mechanisms that underpin
these principles
— like the burden of proof, due process,
the presumption of innocence.
Instead we play judge, jury and jailer in
our own kangaroo courts.
Like victims, we also dodge personal responsibility.
If our own flaws and shortcomings are pointed out
we’ll find ways to excuse, minimise or deny them.
Someone else is always to blame.
Lastly we come to the rescuer, who looks for
victims to save.
In this role, we take on too much responsibility
by assuming the burden of other people’s
problems.
On the surface, we might appear self-sacrificing.
It can seem — to others and ourselves —
like we’re constantly putting our own needs
behind the needs of others.
In fact, our most dominant need is firmly
stage front.
As rescuers, our chief goal isn’t to help others.
It’s to extract validation from them.
Here we have the central self-deception of
this dramatic role.
Playing the rescuer is primarily about taking,
not giving.
This helps to explain why targets often come
away from us feeling so drained.
The specific type of validation we look for
as rescuers can vary hugely.
We might be after attention, admiration, control,
social acceptance.
If we have problems with guilt or shame
we might play the rescuer to gain self-worth.
Our need for validation can also vary in intensity.
The more intense it gets, the less room we
have for competing needs
— other people’s or our own —
and the more misguided and reckless our rescue
attempts can become.
So we have three dramatic roles, all based
in delusion and contradiction
each focused on seeking affirmation for its
particular fantasy.
It’s no surprise that none of them do anything
to help us work towards solutions.
Instead they just reinforce existing problems
— and generate new ones.
When we think of saviour complexes
we might reasonably equate them with the rescuer
position.
In fact saviours can occupy any of the dramatic roles.
One of the things that makes drama
such a slippery, tangled-up form of social
interaction
is that players can switch positions.
Rescuers can become victims.
Victims can become persecutors.
And so on.
These role shifts can occur suddenly in response
to a single incident
that disrupts our perception of ourselves
in relation to others.
Or they can be gradual, in response to an
accumulation of experiences.
An example of these dramatic shifts is illustrated
in the story of someone I’ll call Gordon.
Gordon has a radioactive saviour streak.
He’s recruited by an ideological group that
seems to share his outlook.
In rescuer mode, Gordon approaches
other individuals to recruit.
But things don’t go well.
Some of his targets laugh at his ideas.
Some angrily condemn them as corrupt and degrading.
Some targets engage in polite discourse and
offer thoughtful criticisms.
The majority simply isn’t interested.
Something Gordon later came to appreciate
was that people generally have their own concerns
to deal with
and don’t have time for ideological sales
pitches from strangers.
But at the time, all these widely diverging
reactions just blur into one big rejection.
For Gordon, these encounters aren’t about
an exchange of ideas.
They’re geared towards one outcome: recruitment.
And all he takes away is that people wouldn’t
listen to him.
He slips into a self-pitying victim position.
Can’t they see he’s trying to help them?
From his self-absorbed viewpoint
people seem deliberately, maliciously obstructive.
As his ideas continue to get rebuffed
his despair hardens into contempt.
Gradually, he drifts into the persecutor position.
In his mind, if you’re not onboard with
the group’s ideas
you’re an obstacle to salvation.
He starts insulting anyone who isn’t instantly
receptive to his ideas.
When people react with predictable hostility
Gordon takes their animosity as proof of their
wicked nature.
His negativity has become self-fulfilling.
He actively creates enemies in the world
then complains the world is full of enemies.
If you’d met him at this point
there would’ve been no hint of his idealistic
beginnings.
He’d become an aggressive force for conflict
and division.
We might conclude that Gordon had now lost
his saviour tendencies.
In fact, Gordon reflected that it was during
this period
that he felt more heroic than ever.
He was no longer fighting some abstract philosophy.
He was in the trenches
pushing back against living breathing adversaries.
As Gordon’s story illustrates
once we step onto the dramatic stage
we can’t always tell where we’ll end up.
Drama is about the pursuit of emotional validation
unconstrained by reality.
Without facts or context to guide us
it’s easy to lose our bearings.
What feel initially like noble intentions
can steer us into monstrous actions.
How do we step off this seductive stage?
If we can bring our focus back to reality
we might be able to make the shift
from a drama-prone saviour to a drama-free
supporter.
A crucial part of that shift is listening.
Like many saviours, Gordon recalled that he
always tended
to skim the surface of what people said to him
looking for potential problems.
As a result of not listening
he’d end up bending himself all out of shape
intervening in situations he’d completely
misunderstood.
A friend might be grumbling about a rough
day at work.
Suddenly Gordon would be telling him to retrain
for another job
and spewing a stream of career ideas.
Looking back on moments like these
Gordon realised how overbearing his behaviour
used to be.
He could see now that all his friend wanted
was a bit of tea and sympathy.
Drama feeds on misinterpretation.
By helping to avoid misinterpretation
listening is a great preventative measure
against drama.
Being a supporter means encouraging people’s
own efforts to help themselves.
When we constantly step in and take over
we push people towardsdependence, passivity,
unaccountability.
In other words, a victim position.
To promote the opposite qualities
—of self-reliance, proactivity and responsibility —
we have to stand back and let people work
through
their own problems with minimal intervention.
Supporters acknowledge their own needs.
Of course there’ll be moments in life
when we put other people’s needs first
— sometimes to the extreme detriment of
our own.
But these moments are meant to be the exception,
not the rule.
Constantly neglecting ourselves is an unsustainable
living strategy.
And an irresponsible one.
If our habitual self-neglect leads to severe problems
like health issues or financial troubles
we can end up becoming a significant burden
on others.
Putting our own needs first doesn’t mean
impinging on other people’s needs.
In fact, putting our own needs first leaves
us better equipped
for the times when other people really do
need us.
Leading on from that, supporters pursue their
own full life.
Saviours often have pretty empty lives.
Is the emptiness a result of their constant heroics?
Or do the heroics act as a distraction from
a pre-existing emptiness?
Either way, investing in our own lives
helps prevent us from intruding in the lives
of others.
For individuals who manage to hang up their cape
and let go of their saviour tendencies
there’s sometimes a period of acute embarrassment
when they reflect on their previous pseudo-heroic
behaviour.
I want to look at some real-life cases of people
who weathered that embarrassment
and began a new anti-drama life.
I met the individual I’ll call ‘Tyrone’
at university
during my psychology degree.
We were assigned to the same tutorial group.
These weresmalls group of five or six students
who met every week, supervised by a course leader
to discuss course material and explore individual
areas of interest.
In our group, discussions were constantly
derailed by Tyrone.
I’ve often forgotten how disruptive he was
because after the first year he transformed
into a different person
—positive, reflective, a team player and
a real giggler.
It’s strange —and sad — to remember
the closed-off individual
we met in year one who exuded perpetual frustration.
During that first year
Tyrone styled himself as a champion social educator
enlightening the ignorant masses.
From our very first tutorial session
he was scrutinising everyone’s words for
possible prejudicial content.
Someone would be speaking and he’d suddenly
lurch forward
and shout ‘Hold on!’ and accuse the speaker
of some social bias.
These accusations would invariably prove to
be unfounded.
His standard charge was: ‘That’s a stereotype!’
One of countless examples was when a group
member I’ll call Chaz
was speaking about how caring her mother was.
Tyrone cried ‘Stereotype!’ and declared that Chaz
was perpetuating the idea that women have
to be nurturing.
Furthermore — by implication — she was
perpetuating the idea
that men didn’t have to be nurturing.
This was his typical tactic.
He would fallaciously extrapolate gigantic
through-lines
from a single innocent instance.
This allowed him to invent a continual stream
of transgressions
to protest against.
Sometimes, after shouting ‘Hold on!’
Tyrone would pause for a moment then back down.
He’d explain that he thought the speaker
was about to say something prejudiced.
He’d then allow the speaker to continue.
Evidently he had constant negative expectations
of bias from us.
His consistent failure to find those biases
did nothing to persuade him of their nonexistence.
For Tyrone, absence of evidence was evidence
of hidden presence.
Tyrone’s behaviour was so outlandish that
after a few weeks
a member of the group I’ll call Yani suggested
it must be
some kind of psychology experiment.
He said Tyrone had to be a plant.
No one behaved like this in real life.
A sheepish smile on Tyrone’s face was all
the confirmation the group needed.
People laughed and told him what a convincing
jerk he’d been.
Eventually, the tutor, Bob, gingerly intervened
and said it wasn’t an experiment.
Tyrone was for real.
Let’s just say the rest of that session
was a little tense.
And it was also a turning point.
Up until then, Tyrone had monopolised the
group’s attention very successfully.
After that, there was a steep decline in patience.
Group members stopped enabling his interruptions.
We’d carry on speaking.
It didn’t stop his accusations.
But he did learn to wait his turn.
Tyrone’s relentless misinterpretations of
our words
were a constant invitation to conflict and drama.
For the most part, group members brushed his
comments off.
The predominant feeling towards him
was secondhand embarrassment.
He was like a child in a newspaper cape
waiting to be told what a brave hero he was.
But one member — a Scottish nurse I’ll
call June —was more direct.
One week, June was recounting a family event
up in Glasgow.
When she mentioned that she’d had to order cabs
for several family members who were too drunk
to drive
Tyrone sailed into action, crying ‘Stereotype!’
and told her she was perpetuating the idea
that all Scottish people were alcoholics.
June joked that most of her relatives were
alcoholics.
But Tyrone wouldn’t let it lie.
He started pseudo-psychoanalysing her.
He suggested that she’d heard these Scottish
stereotypes
so many times, she’d absorbed them
— and developed some kind of self-loathing.
He used words like ‘unconscious’ and ‘internalised’
and spoke with breathtaking condescension.
Eventually June snapped and bluntly told him
where to go.
That moment would set the tone for their entire
relationship.
Whenever he tried to target her
she’d swiftly shut him down with some colourful
response.
For a time, he tried to play the wounded party.
At one point he called on Bob to tell June
she couldn’t speak to him that way
— in effect, inviting Bob to play the rescuer.
Bob declined.
Instead he imparted some friendly advice:
‘If you don’t want to get stung, don’t
poke the beehive.’
It was a simple, practical solution.
And Tyrone completely ignored it.
For the rest of the year, he continued to
poke the beehive
and flip-flop between persecutor and victim.
At the time, we found his masochism baffling.
Why choose to keep getting stung?
But we were applying rationality to drama.
For masochism to persist, there has to be
some pay-off.
For Tyrone, these stings gave him a sense
of heroic martyrdom.
He was being attacked for his principles.
During that first year, the one time Tyrone
showed genuine humility
was when one of his grandstanding rescue attempts
blew up in his face.
We were all sharing memories of our primary schools.
Chaz commented that it was weird having to sing
Christian hymns in the morning assemblies.
Tyrone flew to her aid, declaring her school
to be racist.
Chaz disagreed.
But Tyrone persisted.
He said with her being Indian, they should’ve
been more sensitive
—she might’ve been a Hindu or a Sikh
or a Buddhist.
Chaz laughed and said ‘I’m not Indian.’
Tyrone’s face turned the colour of a London bus.
Having spewed non-stop false allegations of
ignorance against everyone else
he was now caught in a very public moment
of genuine ignorance.
After pausing to let Tyrone respond
—an opportunity he declined —
Chaz moved on, without commentor drama
picking up where she’d left off before his
interjection.
Tyrone was mute for the rest of the session
and barely spoke for the next few weeks.
There was nothing showy or dramatic about
his silence.
For the first time he seemed
genuinely uncomfortable with attention.
Although the lure of drama gradually took
hold again
and the accusations started creeping back
it was a welcome glimpse of authenticity
— one that would later expand beyond anyone’s
expectations.
In the second year, Tyrone returned to the
group a changed man.
The old air of restless frustration was gone.
He was open, relaxed and engaged.
He listened without prejudice.
And he revealed the most amazing
Michael Fassbender smile
— a smile that would become my abiding image
of him
clouding out that rocky first year.
Some weeks into the term, he told me that,
over the summer
he’d gotten into a relationship.
One weekend, his girlfriend had some friends
around.
To her mortification, Tyrone donned his social
educator mask
and pulled them to pieces.
After they left she delivered some devastating
home truths.
She said Tyrone pretended to be this amazing,
sensitive, compassionate person.
But actually he treated people like trash.
He looked for the meanest possible interpretation
of people’s words
just to make himself look good.
She said he was a hypocrite and a fraud.
It hit him where he lived.
He was a hypocrite
—especially in the old sense of the word.
An actor, playing a role.
He wanted to look cool, to be admired.
At school he’d got some positive attention
from students and teachers for speaking out
against stereotypes.
It became his thing.
Sadly it went to a dark place.
It became all about getting admiration, not
tackling real prejudice.
He became a social vampire.
People became things to feed on.
Tyrone’s girlfriend was the first person
in a long time
whose feelings he really cared about.
She meant the world to him.
And her rebuke was the kick he’d needed
to sort himself out.
As the second year progressed
the group dived deep into subjects like prejudice
and discrimination.
Some of us shared some related real-life experiences
of being shunned and abused by families and
communities.
Tyrone said it was an eye-opener.
He’d had no idea what we’d been through.
He cringed at how he had presumed to educate us
about the nature of prejudice and all its
depth and subtleties
when all the time, we’d live it.
We just didn’t feel the need to constantly
bring it up
when it had no relevance.
Tyrone privately apologised to each member
of the group
for his previous behaviour.
But one member —June — always kept her
distance.
Tyrone lamented that he really blew it with her.
But he said it was a useful reminder
that, in life, you can’t always mend what
you break.
Sometimes, when I get cynical about people’s
ability to change
I remember Tyrone’s transformation.
And his incredible smile.
I want to end with the stories of two individual
clients
with saviour complexes who both came to therapy
in a state of collapsed victimhood.
Dimmy was a personal trainer who’d lost
a number of long-term clients
he said he’d gone out of his way to help.
Marion had been volunteering on the phones
at a helpline charity for some years
until a few days ago when she said she’d
been forced out.
They both portrayed themselves as big-hearted
fools in a heartless world.
But their casual disregard for personal boundaries
hinted at a different picture.
Dimmy would quiz me intrusively about my health
and fitness
— and give unsolicited tips on everything
from specific exercises to food to sleeping
patterns.
He’d often follow up later, wanting to know
if I’d taken his advice.
When he didn’t get an affirmative answer,he
was visibly irked.
Marion was a habitual space invader
constantly touching me, sometimes in very
intimate areas.
When I withdrew from her touch, she’d often
try to reestablish it.
She described herself as an ‘obligate empath’.
She explained this meant she couldn’t help
picking up other people’s thoughts and feelings.
As she recounted her experiences volunteering
at the helpline
she would repeatedly preempt my reactions.
‘Ah! Now you’re thinking X.’
‘Ah!Now you’re thinking Y.’
Her guesses were consistently wrong
and she made no attempt to verify them with me.
Dimmy and Marion had both become so absorbed
in their own fantasy image
they’d lost sight of how they came across
to others.
Gently challenging their self-perceptions
with empathy exercises
helped to reboot their social awareness.
Slowly they began to see
how their superhero costumes looked from the
outside.
When clients start to realise their own behaviour
might be the principal source of their problems
there’s often a sequence of specific responses.
They defend their actions, then regret them
then understand them
and finally make peace with them.
This sequence isn’t set in stone.
A client might become stuck in one stage for
a while
or flip back and forward between stages.
In the defend stage
we’re not ready to see the negative impact
of our behaviour.
We move into regret as reality sinks in.
Our feelings of regret might range from mild
to intensely painful.
For a time we might obsess over a particular
incident
or feel overwhelmed by multiple incidents.
That can start to shift when we begin to understand
our behaviour
—to see where it came from; what prompted it;
what needs we were trying to serve.
Finally, in the peace-making stage
our feelings about the past resolve and subside.
As Dimmy and Marion moved through these stages
their true stories unfolded.
Marion had a turbulent early life
moving from place to place because of her
parents’ work.
She learned to make friends fast by being useful.
Helpful.
It became her identity.
She was the one people turned to with their
problems.
In adult life, she began to think about a
career in counselling
and decided to test the water by volunteering
at a helpline charity.
She found it deeply rewarding.
But the lines began to blur.
Marion had no ‘off’ switch.
She’d lose herself in the stories of her callers
who played incessantly on her mind.
She was soon juggling multiple weekly shifts
prompting jokes that she lived at the call
centre.
But for Marion it was becoming a substitute home.
She even bought a stack of mugs with hearts
printed on them
to replace all the old ones in the kitchen.
Boundaries with colleagues also began to dissolve.
Marion styled herself as an old mother hen
dispensing relentless guidance.
Casual conversations became advice clinics.
When volunteers took difficult calls
she’d swoop in, imposing maternal hugs.
Underpinning her increasingly smothering behaviour
was Marion’s growing conviction that she
could read people’s minds.
Within the mental health field
this is recognised as a classic sign of burn-out.
Practitioners come to believe they’ve seen
it all before
and stop checking their assumptions.
Things came to a head one week
after a new volunteer took a distressing call.
When Marion flung herself on him,
he fended her off.
She was shocked at the rejection.
The following week, she confronted him about
the brush-off
and asked him who taught him to reject love.
When he dismissed the question, she became
more insistent
delivering a forceful speech about how he
was pushing his feelings down
and how he shouldn’t be trying to help others
if he wasn’t willing to work on himself.
She’d later feel the irony of those words.
Her tirade disrupted the calls of her colleagues
who reported it to management.
It wasn’t the first complaint
and she was suspended pending an investigation.
It was a body blow.
Marion saw herself as an untouchable authority figure.
To be subjected to disciplinary procedure
sparked pure rage.
She drove to the call centre after hours
smashed all her heart mugs and piled them
on a table
next to her resignation letter.
Within a week she was begging to come back.
When the charity refused, she came to therapy
playing the victim.
In her sessions
Marion realised how disconnected she’d become
from people.
She cringed at how she’d bullied the new
volunteer
after his distressing call.
What a horrible start for him.
She conceded the helpline wasn’t where she
should be.
Marion came to understand the origins of her
compulsion to help.
It had been a survival tactic
— a way to quickly anchor herself in new
company.
She worked on forging healthier anchors.
In our time together, I watched her blossom
in authenticity
as she shook off her dramatic role-based identity.
Like Marion, Dimmy had become an overbearing
presence at work.
For years he’d built a great reputation
at his gym.
But in recent months he’d alienated some
long-term clients
with accusations of lack of commitment
and inappropriate comments about their personal
relationships.
When we looked at what was going on in Dimmy’s
own relationships
he revealed that he’d recently become estranged
from his family
following some explosive exchanges.
One of his brothers had announced that he
and his wife
were emigrating to her native Norway.
Dimmy objected and tried to stop the move.
For Dimmy, family was everything.
After their father died, he’d worked hard
to keep everyone together.
He’d helped his brothers find homes near
their mother’s house
so they could all live close together, spend
weekends together,
go on family holidays together.
When partners started coming along
it hadn’t been easy to make them understand
how Dimmy wanted things done.
But eventually they settled into his routines.
Now his brother’s move threatened to destroy
everything.
Dimmy started having nightmares about the
end of the world.
He began showing up at his brother’s house
making scenes
and accusing his sister-in-law of tearing
the family apart.
Family members who tried to reason with him
were accused of disloyalty.
Eventually, his mother stepped in and told him
everyone was sick of his controlling behaviour.
Things were going to have to change.
For Dimmy, it was the ultimate betrayal.
He stopped speaking to everyone.
In therapy, Dimmy saw that everything was
tied up with his father’s death.
When Dimmy was 10
his father became terminally ill with cancer.
Dimmy became the hero child,
helping and protecting his family.
This was reinforced by his dying father
who told Dimmy he was in charge now.
He told him family was everything in life
and made Dimmy promise to keep everyone together.
For over twenty years, Dimmy had been working
to keep that promise.
In the early years, he’d been an extremely
positive force in the family
helping his mother, protecting and encouraging
his brothers.
But over time, like other saviours who try
to preserve people in a timeless bubble
he’d become oppressive and dictatorial.
Dimmy came to understand that it wasn’t his role
to take charge and keep everyone together.
Letting go of his father’s promise was an
emotional experience for him.
But he conceded his brothers
weren’t children anymore.
They had their own lives to lead.
Despite the conflict of recent months
there was enough love in Dimmy’s family
to start over.
And Dimmy was there to wave his brother goodbye.
Helping is about identifying and addressing
the legitimate needs of a situation.
When those things aren’t done
then whatever we think we’re doing, we’re
not helping.
And we might be straying into a parody of
problem-solving called drama.
It can be tough to give up the self-affirming
illusions drama offers us.
And we can drift into some ugly harmful behaviour.
When someone’s stuck in a dramatic role
they have to want to get out of it themselves.
Attempts by others to coax them off the dramatic
stage
will often be twisted into more drama.
But as the stories of Dimmy, Marion, Tyrone
and Gordon show
all hope is not lost when saviours go bad.